.\" swapspace manpage
.TH SWAPSPACE 8 "July 2005" "swapspace 1.5" "Linux System Administration"
.SH NAME
swapspace \- dynamically manage swap space
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B swapspace
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
Monitor memory and swap usage and allocate or deallocate swap space as needed.
This program aims to reduce or do away with the need for swapfiles.
.PP
.B swapspace
can be built in two configurations: the full-featured one (which is
now the default) or the unconfigurable version.  The latter only accepts a few
options, disabling all features that are probably only relevant to developers.
At some point in the feature, when enough confidence exists that the various
configuration parameters are either good enough for everyone or have been made
unnecessary, the unconfigurable build may become the default.
.PP
The following options are accepted in the unconfigurable version.  All of these
have more extensive equivalents in the full-featured version.
.TP
\fB\-d\fR
Quietly ignored; always enabled in unconfigurable version.
.TP
\fB\-e\fR
Attempt to free up all allocated swap files.  Returns 0 if all files were
successfully erased, or 1 otherwise.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR
Display usage information and exit.
.TP
\fB\-p\fR
Write process identifier to \fI/var/lib/swapspace.pid\fR when starting (and
delete it when shutting down).  The file's name and location cannot be changed
in the unconfigurable version.
.TP
\fB\-q\fR
Quietly ignored; always enabled in unconfigurable version.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR
Quietly ignored; always enabled in unconfigurable version.
.TP
\fB\-V\fR
Print program version information and exit.
.PP
In most cases, these should be the only options of any interest for normal use
of the program.  All files are kept in their default locations, which were
chosen in accordance with the Linux Filesystem Hierarchy Standard, and
algorithmic parameters are left at defaults that have been tested to work well
for a wide range of uses.
.PP
The full-featured configuration accepts more options, as listed below.
The long-format options may also be specified, without the leading "\-\-", in a
configuration file.  By default, \fI/etc/swapspace.conf\fR is read on startup.
.TP
\fB\-a\fR \fIduration\fR, \fB\-\-cooldown\fR=\fIduration\fR
If disk space runs out when allocating a swapfile, wait for \fIduration\fR
iterations (of roughly one second each) before considering allocating one
again; or if space doesn't run out, wait for \fIduration\fR iterations before 
considering deallocating uneeded swapfiles.  This stabilizes the daemon's
behaviour in the face of varying memory requirements.
.TP
\fB\-B\fR \fIp\fR, \fB\-\-buffer_elasticity\fR=\fIp\fR
Consider \fIp\fR% of system-allocated I/O buffers to be available for other use.
.TP
\fB\-c\fR \fIfile\fR, \fB\-\-configfile\fR=\fIfile\fR
Read \fIfile\fR instead of the default configuration file.
.TP
\fB\-C\fR \fIp\fR, \fB\-\-cache_elasticity\fR=\fIp\fR
Consider \fIp\fR% of filesystem cache to be available for other use.
.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-daemon\fR
Run quietly in the background.  This is the normal way to run the program.
.TP
\fB\-e\fR, \fB\-\-erase\fR
Attempt to free up all allocated swap files.  Returns 0 if all files were
successfully erased, or 1 otherwise.
.TP
\fB\-f\fR \fIp\fR, \fB\-\-freetarget\fR=\fIp\fR
Aim to have \fIp\fR% of combined memory and swap space free.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Display usage information and exit.
.TP
\fB\-l\fR \fIp\fR, \fB\-\-lower_freelimit\fR=\fIp\fR
Try to keep at least \fIp\fR% of combined memory and swap space free; if less
than \fIp\fR percent is available, attempt to allocate more swap space.
.TP
\fB\-M\fR \fIsize\fR, \fB\-\-max_swapsize\fR=\fIsize\fR
Never let swapfiles become larger than \fIsize\fR bytes.  You don't normally
need to set this; the daemon will learn when its swap files get too big and
adapt automatically.
.TP
\fB\-m\fR \fIsize\fR, \fB\-\-min_swapsize\fR=\fIsize\fR
Never bother to allocate any swapfiles smaller than \fIsize\fR bytes.  There
should be no need to change this variable except for testing.
.TP
\fB\-p\fR [\fIfile\fR], \fB\-\-pidfile\fR[=\fIfile\fR]
Write process identifier to \fIfile\fR when starting (and delete \fIfile\fR when
shutting down); defaults to \fI/var/lib/swapspace.pid\fR.
.TP
\fB\-P\fR, \fB\-\-paranoid\fR
Overwrite retired swapfiles before they are deleted, so an attacker who obtains
access to the disk without going through the system's access control checks
(e.g. by unplugging the computer and then rebooting from a CD) cannot retrieve
the swapped data.  There is no guarantee that this will work, and it will not
thwart advanced forensic analysis using custom-built hardware; but it may reduce
the chances of an attacker with physical access to the system obtaining
passwords, credit card numbers etc.  The program will attempt to free up all
allocated swapfiles on termination and return a success code for this cleanup,
as if the \fB\-\-erase\fR had been specified.
.TP
\fBCaution\fR
The \fB\-\-paranoid\fR option will slow down swap file management considerably. 
In particular, stopping the daemon will cause it to try and deallocate (and
wipe) all swapfiles it has created, and they will not be available for swapping
immediately after reboot.
.TP
\fB\-q\fR, \fB\-\-quiet\fR
Suppress informational output.
.TP
\fB\-s\fR \fIdir\fR, \fB\-\-swappath\fR=\fIdir\fR
Create swapfiles in directory \fIdir\fR instead of default location
\fI/var/lib/swapspace\fR.  This location must be accessible to \fIroot\fR only;
allowing anyone else to write to this directory or even read swapped data would
be a \fUserious security breach\fR.
.TP
\fB\-u\fR \fIp\fR, \fB\-\-upper_freelimit\fR=\fIp\fR
Avoid having more than \fIp\fR% of combined memory and swap space free; if this
percentage is exceeded, try to deallocate swap space.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR
Log debug information to system log and/or standard output, as appropriate.
.TP
\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
Print program version information and exit.
.PP
Numbers may be suffixed with \fIk\fR, \fIm\fR, \fIg\fR or \fIt\fR to indicate
kilobytes, megabytes, gigabytes or terabytes respectively: \fI1k\fR means 1024
bytes, \fI1m\fR means 1024 kilobytes, \fI4g\fR means 4096 megabytes and so on.
.PP
Timings are measured in \fIiterations\fR, which should typically last about one
second each.  No pretense of accurate timing is made; this is not the kind of
program you would run on a hard-realtime system.
.PP
Any messages are sent to the system daemon log; it is also printed to the
standard output/error streams (as appropriate based on the urgency of each
individual message) if available.
.SH SIGNALS
State information can be logged by sending the program the \fBSIGUSR1\fR signal
(user-defined signal 1).  Not all of this information will always be current;
most of the information internal to \fBswapspace\fR is only updated when needed.
.PP
Sending the \fBSIGUSR2\fR signal will make the program free all swapfiles that
are not currently needed, and abstain from allocating any more for the timespan
of one cooldown period.  The program will behave as if it just tried to create a
swapfile but ran out of disk space.
.SH FILES
\& /etc/init.d/swapspace
\& /etc/swapspace.conf
\& /usr/sbin/swapspace
\& /var/lib/swapspace/
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Jeroen T. Vermeulen
.SH BUGS
Please report any bugs you may find on the project website at:
http://thaiopensource.org/development/swapspace/ 
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2005 Software Industry Promotion Agency (SIPA), Thailand
.br
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is no
warranty whatsoever.  Use entirely at your own risk.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR kill (1),
.BR mkswap (8),
.BR signal (7),
.BR swapon (2),
.BR swapoff (2),
.BR swapon (8),
.BR swapoff (8)
